# Paleocurrent_Dispersion

This repository was created during my masters thesis to store all of my code and data for my thesis. All of my raw data is stored within these files, as well as the scripts I used to process the raw data for transparency. Though for any researchers who are using this in the future, there is only one script you need to use, and that is the Dispersion Calculator. But really, that is overkill unless you have large datasets. Lets be real, these are paleocurrent datasets. None of them ever get that big. It is up to you to try to figure out the cluster that is my code or just use a rose diagram plotting tool (or excel, the math isn’t that hard). 

For any professional coders that stumble onto this project for who knows what reason. Please keep in mind I wrote these programs as I learned how to code. As you can see, I never really did learn how to code, just bumbled my way through until it worked. Rest easy, I am a pilot now, so no need to be upset that I am dispensing more code into the world. 

All good chuckles aside, I am very proud of how well this project came together (over the 6 years I was working on it…). Its not much in the grand scheme of things, but I am glad I did it. 

## Acknowledgements 

I would like to thank my advisor Dr. Brady Foreman for his help and guidance on this research as well as the initial trouble shooting for calculating Dispersion. I also greatly thank Juan Carillo who has helped me both learn Python as well as make some sizeable contributions to the efficiency of my scripts.


## Directions

The Dispersion Calculator is designed to input a .csv file of raw directional measurements and calculate the dispersion value for those measurements. This script is only meant for raw paleocurrent directions (or any other directional measurements one would like to know). To first check for modality, a rose diagram plotting tool should be used. 

The other scripts are the ones that I used for my master thesis to calculate dispersion of modern river systems. Those along with the included Thesis_Data.xlsx file are included for repeatablility and transparency for my research. To use these, first convert the river dataset from the Thesis_Data file into a single .csv file, then run it through the script of your choice by renaming the read-in and export files. 

### Abstract

Large-scale depositional river systems typically develop into either a lower-sinuous abraided or higher-sinuous meandering morphology linked, in part, to the boundary conditions experienced by the basin. However, inferring these planform morphologies from ancient fluvial systems in the rock record is tenuous. In alluvial stratigraphy, vertical sandbody exposures in many cases yield lithofacies characteristics and patterns that are nonunique for even endmember planform fluvial systems. Yet, within fluvial sandbodies, sedimentary structures preserve a range of paleo-flow directions (i.e., paleocurrents) ultimately tied to the sinuosity of the ancient channels. The range and density of these directional measurements can be quantified by calculating a dispersion value for the dataset. In this study I calculated dispersion values linked to the known planform morphologies of 112 modern rivers. For each channel, the centerline azimuth directions (n = 250) were consecutively measured over a well-defined section of the river. To replicate natural variation in bedform directions from channel centerline azimuth, a “transport anomaly” value, calculated by measuring the difference between bedform migration direction and channel centerline azimuths in modern rivers, was randomly assigned to each channel azimuth measurement. Results show dispersion values for braided systems ranged from 0.600 to 0.775 and values meandering systems ranged from 0.275 to 0.581, showing a clear separation between end-member morphologies. This suggests planform morphology feasibly can be recovered from sufficiently large (n > 55) paleocurrent measurements from a fluvial sandbody. Moreover, the dataset shows dispersion correlates (R2 = 0.92) with the intensity of sinuosity of meandering rivers. This offers the additional opportunity to quantitatively estimate paleo-sinuosity from outcrops. I evaluated the applicability of this approach using two case studies in Cretaceous and Paleogene strata of Utah and Wyoming, respectively, wherein fluvial sandbody channels crop out as inverted topographic features on the modern landscape. In both braided and meandering cases the dispersion and sinuosity reconstructions were successful identifying known planform morphology and sinuosity.
